STRJ: THE STRATEGO-TO-JAVA COMPILER
===================================

The compiler comes in two flavors: one called strj, compiled with the
standard C-based strc. The second is a bootstrapped, cross-platform
compiler that lives in strategoxt.jar. Note that Stratego executables
compiled with strj do not support XTC (since it depends on forking
native executables and assumes filesystem access) and the
strategoxt.jar compiler is no exception. This means that you have to
explicitly specify the import path of dependencies that would
otherwise be resolved using XTC. Another difference between the two
is that strj still uses the C-based SGLR parser, while strategoxt.jar
uses JSGLR.

Compiling a simple application from the command line with either
compiler is similar to doing so with the C version of Stratego:

  strj -i foo.str -la stratego-lib

or

  java -jar strategoxt.jar -i foo.str -la stratego-lib

It should be noted that at this time the compiler only outputs '.java'
source files and not '.class' files. Subsequent compilation should be
done using a standard Java compiler (ideally, in an automated fashion
using an Ant build script or Eclipse). The (non-portable) strj-jar
shell script can also help with command-line or scripted builds.

KNOWN ISSUES AND LIMITATIONS
============================

The Stratego/J runtime implements most of the primitives of the
natively compiled version of Stratego, but some compatibility issues
might arise. In particular, the parsing primitives are implemented
using JSGLR, the Java version of SGLR, which may not be bug-for-bug
compatible with the C version of SGLR. Mainly, the post-parse filter
implementation might not always produce the same results. This
especially impacts the heuristic filters, which are disabled by
default, but used for Stratego's concrete syntax embedding. To work
around any problems, the native 'strj' executable can be used to
compile these files, or they can be pre-parse them to '.rtree' files
using parse-stratego. A general recommendation may be to disable the
heuristic filters in the .meta files using the HeuristicFilters(Off())
directive.

The standard Sun compiler can be quite slow when compiling large
Stratego projects. We recommend using ECJ (Eclipse Compiler for Java)
instead, which is much faster and less memory-intensive. ECJ is
distributed as part of Eclipse, and can be executed as follows:

  java -cp plugins/org.eclipse.jdt.core_*.jar  org.eclipse.jdt.internal.compiler.batch.Main

Many Linux distributions also provide a stand-alone version of ECJ
through their package manager.  (Note that ECJ 3.3 and lower have a
bug that can be worked around with the -Xecj33 flag.) When using the
Sun compiler, you may need to add option -J-mx256m to increase the
available heap space, and likely need to have a fair amount of
patience ;)

Stratego programs compiled to Java do not have the same performance
characteristics as those compiled using the native Stratego compiler
strc. The exact numbers vary per application (some, such as the
somewhat artificial ASF+SDF benchmark, actually run faster on Java),
but natively compiled Stratego applications that include parsing and
pretty-printing are typically a factor two faster. Future
optimizations, particularly in the term library and in I/O, may make
this gap smaller.

A final open issue is the stack usage by typical Stratego programs,
putting JVM implementations with a small default stack size at risk of
throwing a StackOverflowException (notably the Sun JVM on Linux). For
these systems, running the JVM with option -ss4m avoids the stack
overflow problem. (When this parameter is not set and a stack overflow
occurs, compiled applications will hint at this setting.)

While the XTC standard library strategies (such as xtc-io-wrap) are
supported, support for the XTC repository is not implemented as this
time because of portability concerns. Any xtc-transform or xtc-call
invocations report a warning, and simply invoke executables on the
path. For the interest of portability, applications that make use of
these strategies should use library strategies instead, as discussed
in the following section. As for the compiler itself, it may be
necessary to specify additional import paths for files that would
normally be resolved using XTC. Use the -I option to specify the paths
of any parse tables, libraries, or other dependencies explicitly.

USING EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS AND LIBRARIES
=========================================

A trend in Stratego programs has been to use the standard libraries in
favor of the (slower, less portable) XTC interface. For example, the
parse-file strategy from libstratego-sglr can be used to parse
files. Since XTC depends on native executables and a centralized
repository, it is not portable and not supported on the Java
platform. As an alternative, library calls should be used instead,
which is generally the preferred method for invoking external
components.

Libraries in the Java environment have a package name. For example,
the Stratego standard library resides in the
org.strategoxt.stratego_lib package. To maintain compatibility, these
package names are not used within the Stratego language, but only at
compile time and when the components are linked. For example, to link
a program to the standard library the option '-la
org.strategoxt.stratego_lib' can be specified. The standard libraries
also have aliases that correspond to the XTC names commonly used with
strc; '-la stratego-lib' is also accepted. To define a package name
for your own library, use the '-p' and '--library' options. For
example:

  java -jar strategoxt.jar -i foo.str --library --clean -p org.foo \
       -o bin/org/foo/Main.java

Note that each Stratego component may specify a different main class
(Main in this case), but that they must still reside in different
packages as to avoid overlap between strategy classes.

JAVA INTEGRATION
================

A typical use case of compiling Stratego applications to Java is to
integrate them into an existing Java application or environment.
Interaction with the other Java components is possible in a number of
ways:

- Java components can directly call Stratego strategies, by calling
  the Main.init() method in the appropriate package and invoking a
  Strategy using some_strategy_0_0.instance.invoke(). If the exit
  strategy is called at any point, a StrategoExit exception will be
  thrown; a call to fatal-err will throw a StrategoErrorExit
  exception.
  
- Normal Java components can be used to implement or override Stratego
  strategies, allowing for tighter coupling between Stratego and a
  Java application. See for example
  https://svn.strategoxt.org/repos/StrategoXT/ strc-java/trunk/
  java/runtime/org/strategoxt/lang/compat/libstratego_rtg_compat
  where two strategies (originally implemented natively in C) are
  implemented in Java. Every strategy has an 'instance' field that
  allows it to be dynamically redefined.

- Instead of just plain ATerms, Stratego can operate on any Java
  object tree or graph that implements the IStrategoTerm and
  associated interfaces. This way, it can operate on arbitrary object
  structures, or deeply integrate into a Java-based compiler front-end
  or editor.  See also "Fusing a transformation language with an open
  compiler" by Kalleberg and Visser, and "Domain-Specific Languages
  for Composable Editor Plugins" by Kats, Kalleberg, and Visser.

- Compiled Stratego components can be dynamically loaded from JAR
  files and may be combined with interpreted components using the
  HybridInterpreter class. To interpret a Stratego component,
  pre-compile it to a .ctree file using STRJ and the '-F --library'
  options.

SOURCE CODE
===========

Source code is available directly from SVN at

  https://svn.strategoxt.org/repos/StrategoXT/strc-java/trunk
  
or can be downloaded as a package at hydra.nixos.org.

LICENSING
=========

Most STRJ code is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License.
Some runtime components are licensed under the Eclipse Public License;
external components may be covered by different licenses.

Authors and contributors are listed in the AUTHORS file.

